doc/whats_new/v1.3.rst, before:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_3:

Version 1.3.0
=============

**In Development**

.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- |Enhancement| :meth:`multiclass.OutputCodeClassifier.predict` now uses a more
  efficient pairwise distance reduction. As a consequence, the tie-breaking
  strategy is different and thus the predicted labels may be different.
  :pr:`25196` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| The `fit_transform` method of :class:`decomposition.DictionaryLearning`
  is more efficient but may produce different results as in previous versions when
  `transform_algorithm` is not the same as `fit_algorithm` and the number of iterations
  is small. :pr:`24871` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

- |Fix| Treat more consistently small values in the `W` and `H` matrices during the
  `fit` and `transform` steps of :class:`decomposition.NMF` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchNMF` which can produce different results than previous
  versions. :pr:`25438` by :user:`Yotam Avidar-Constantini <yotamcons>`.

- |Enhancement| The `sample_weight` parameter now will be used in centroids
  initialization for :class:`cluster.KMeans`, :class:`cluster.BisectingKMeans`
  and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`.
  This change will break backward compatibility, since numbers generated
  from same random seeds will be different.
  :pr:`25752` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`,
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

Changes impacting all modules
-----------------------------

- |Enhancement| The `get_feature_names_out` method of the following classes now
  raises a `NotFittedError` if the instance is not fitted. This ensures the error is
  consistent in all estimators with the `get_feature_names_out` method.

  - :class:`impute.MissingIndicator`
  - :class:`feature_extraction.DictVectorizer`
  - :class:`feature_extraction.text.TfidfTransformer`
  - :class:`feature_selection.GenericUnivariateSelect`
  - :class:`feature_selection.RFE`
  - :class:`feature_selection.RFECV`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFdr`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFpr`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFromModel`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFwe`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectKBest`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectPercentile`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SequentialFeatureSelector`
  - :class:`feature_selection.VarianceThreshold`
  - :class:`kernel_approximation.AdditiveChi2Sampler`
  - :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`
  - :class:`impute.KNNImputer`
  - :class:`impute.SimpleImputer`
  - :class:`isotonic.IsotonicRegression`
  - :class:`preprocessing.Binarizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.KBinsDiscretizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.MaxAbsScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.MinMaxScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.Normalizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.OrdinalEncoder`
  - :class:`preprocessing.PowerTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.QuantileTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.RobustScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.SplineTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.StandardScaler`
  - :class:`random_projection.GaussianRandomProjection`
  - :class:`random_projection.SparseRandomProjection`

  The `NotFittedError` displays an informative message asking to fit the instance
  with the appropriate arguments.

  :pr:`25294`, :pr:`25308`, :pr:`25291`, :pr:`25367`, :pr:`25402`,
  by :user:`John Pangas <jpangas>`, :user:`Rahil Parikh <rprkh>` ,
  and :user:`Alex Buzenet <albuzenet>`.

- |Enhancement| Added a multi-threaded Cython routine to the compute squared
  Euclidean distances (sometimes followed by a fused reduction operation) for a
  pair of datasets consisting of a sparse CSR matrix and a dense NumPy.

  This can improve the performance of following functions and estimators:

  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin`
  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin_min`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.AffinityPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.Birch`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.MeanShift`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.OPTICS`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.SpectralClustering`
  - :func:`sklearn.feature_selection.mutual_info_regression`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.Isomap`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.LocallyLinearEmbedding`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.TSNE`
  - :func:`sklearn.manifold.trustworthiness`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelSpreading`

  A typical example of this performance improvement happens when passing a sparse
  CSR matrix to the `predict` or `transform` method of estimators that rely on
  a dense NumPy representation to store their fitted parameters (or the reverse).

  For instance, :meth:`sklearn.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors` is now up to 2 times faster
  for this case on commonly available laptops.

  :pr:`25044` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_selection`
................................

- |Enhancement| All selectors in :mod:`sklearn.feature_selection` will preserve
  a DataFrame's dtype when transformed. :pr:`25102` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :class:`feature_selection.SequentialFeatureSelector`'s `cv` parameter
  now supports generators. :pr:`25973` by `Yao Xiao <Charlie-XIAO>`.

:mod:`sklearn.base`
...................

- |Feature| A `__sklearn_clone__` protocol is now available to override the
  default behavior of :func:`base.clone`. :pr:`24568` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |Fix| :class:`calibration.CalibratedClassifierCV` now does not enforce sample
  alignment on `fit_params`. :pr:`25805` by `Adrin Jalali`_.

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |API| The `sample_weight` parameter in `predict` for
  :meth:`cluster.KMeans.predict` and :meth:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans.predict`
  is now deprecated and will be removed in v1.5.
  :pr:`25251` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`.

- |Enhancement| The `sample_weight` parameter now will be used in centroids
  initialization for :class:`cluster.KMeans`, :class:`cluster.BisectingKMeans`
  and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`.
  This change will break backward compatibility, since numbers generated
  from same random seeds will be different.
  :pr:`25752` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`,
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.datasets`
.......................

- |API| The `data_transposed` argument of :func:`datasets.make_sparse_coded_signal`
  is deprecated and will be removed in v1.5.
  :pr:`25784` by :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger`.

:mod:`sklearn.decomposition`
............................

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.DictionaryLearning` now accepts the parameter
  `callback` for consistency with the function :func:`decomposition.dict_learning`.
  :pr:`24871` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

- |Efficiency| :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchDictionaryLearning` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` are now faster for small batch sizes by
  avoiding duplicate validations.
  :pr:`25490` by :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |Fix| Treat more consistently small values in the `W` and `H` matrices during the
  `fit` and `transform` steps of :class:`decomposition.NMF` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchNMF` which can produce different results than previous
  versions. :pr:`25438` by :user:`Yotam Avidar-Constantini <yotamcons>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Feature| :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor` now supports
  the Gamma deviance loss via `loss="gamma"`.
  Using the Gamma deviance as loss function comes in handy for modelling skewed
  distributed, strictly positive valued targets.
  :pr:`22409` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |Feature| Compute a custom out-of-bag score by passing a callable to
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`, :class:`ensemble.RandomForestRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesClassifier` and :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesRegressor`.
  :pr:`25177` by :user:`Tim Head <betatim>`.

- |Feature| :class:`ensemble.GradientBoostingClassifier` now exposes
  out-of-bag scores via the `oob_scores_` or `oob_score_` attributes.
  :pr:`24882` by :user:`Ashwin Mathur <awinml>`.

- |Efficiency| :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest` predict time is now faster
  (typically by a factor of 8 or more). Internally, the estimator now precomputes
  decision path lengths per tree at `fit` time. It is therefore not possible
  to load an estimator trained with scikit-learn 1.2 to make it predict with
  scikit-learn 1.3: retraining with scikit-learn 1.3 is required.
  :pr:`25186` by :user:`Felipe Breve Siola <fsiola>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier` and
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor` expose the `allow_nan` tag from the
  underlying estimator. :pr:`25506` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :meth:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.fit` sets `max_samples = 1`
  when `max_samples` is a float and `round(n_samples * max_samples) < 1`.
  :pr:`25601` by :user:`Jan Fidor <JanFidor>`.

- |Fix| :meth:`ensemble.IsolationForest.fit` no longer warns about missing
  feature names when called with `contamination` not `"auto"` on a pandas
  dataframe.
  :pr:`25931` by :user:`Yao Xiao <Charlie-XIAO>`.

:mod:`sklearn.exception`
........................
- |Feature| Added :class:`exception.InconsistentVersionWarning` which is raised
  when a scikit-learn estimator is unpickled with a scikit-learn version that is
  inconsistent with the sckit-learn verion the estimator was pickled with.
  :pr:`25297` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_extraction`
.................................

- |API| :class:`feature_extraction.image.PatchExtractor` now follows the
  transformer API of scikit-learn. This class is defined as a stateless transformer
  meaning that it is note required to call `fit` before calling `transform`.
  Parameter validation only happens at `fit` time.
  :pr:`24230` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.impute`
.....................

- |Enhancement| Added the parameter `fill_value` to :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`.
  :pr:`25232` by :user:`Thijs van Weezel <ValueInvestorThijs>`.

:mod:`sklearn.inspection`
.........................

- |API| :func:`inspection.partial_dependence` returns a :class:`utils.Bunch` with
  new key: `grid_values`. The `values` key is deprecated in favor of `grid_values`
  and the `values` key will be removed in 1.5.
  :pr:`21809` and :pr:`25732` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`SGDClassifier`, :class:`SGDRegressor` and
  :class:`SGDOneClassSVM` now preserve dtype for `numpy.float32`.
  :pr:`25587` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Efficiency| The computation of the expected mutual information in
  :func:`metrics.adjusted_mutual_info_score` is now faster when the number of
  unique labels is large and its memory usage is reduced in general.
  :pr:`25713` by :user:`Kshitij Mathur <Kshitij68>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`, :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>` and
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |Feature| Adds `zero_division=np.nan` to multiple classification metrics:
  :func:`precision_score`, :func:`recall_score`, :func:`f1_score`,
  :func:`fbeta_score`, :func:`precision_recall_fscore_support`,
  :func:`classification_report`. When `zero_division=np.nan` and there is a
  zero division, the metric is undefined and is excluded from averaging. When not used
  for averages, the value returned is `np.nan`.
  :pr:`25531` by :user:`Marc Torrellas Socastro <marctorsoc>`.

- |Fix| :func:`metric.manhattan_distances` now supports readonly sparse datasets.
  :pr:`25432` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

- |Fix| Fixed :func:`classification_report` so that empty input will return
  `np.nan`. Previously, "macro avg" and `weighted avg` would return
  e.g. `f1-score=np.nan` and `f1-score=0.0`, being inconsistent. Now, they
  both return `np.nan`.
  :pr:`25531` by :user:`Marc Torrellas Socastro <marctorsoc>`.

- |Fix| :func:`metric.ndcg_score` now gives a meaningful error message for input of
  length 1.
  :pr:`25672` by :user:`Lene Preuss <lene>` and :user:`Wei-Chun Chu <wcchu>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`metrics.silhouette_samples` nows accepts a sparse
  matrix of pairwise distances between samples, or a feature array.
  :pr:`18723` by :user:`Sahil Gupta <sahilgupta2105>` and
  :pr:`24677` by :user:`Ashwin Mathur <awinml>`.

- |Enhancement| A new parameter `drop_intermediate` was added to
  :func:`metrics.precision_recall_curve`,
  :func:`metrics.PrecisionRecallDisplay.from_estimator`,
  :func:`metrics.PrecisionRecallDisplay.from_predictions`,
  which drops some suboptimal thresholds to create lighter precision-recall
  curves.
  :pr:`24668` by :user:`dberenbaum`.

- |Fix| :func:`log_loss` raises a warning if the values of the parameter `y_pred` are
  not normalized, instead of actually normalizing them in the metric. Starting from
  1.5 this will raise an error. :pr:`25299` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor`.

- |API| The `eps` parameter of the :func:`log_loss` has been deprecated and will be
  removed in 1.5. :pr:`25299` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Enhancement| :func:`model_selection.cross_validate` accepts a new parameter
  `return_indices` to return the train-test indices of each cv split.
  :pr:`25659` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.naive_bayes`
..........................

- |Fix| :class:`naive_bayes.GaussianNB` does not raise anymore a `ZeroDivisionError`
  when the provided `sample_weight` reduces the problem to a single class in `fit`.
  :pr:`24140` by :user:`Jonathan Ohayon <Johayon>` and :user:`Chiara Marmo <cmarmo>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |Fix| Remove support for `KulsinskiDistance` in :class:`neighbors.BallTree`. This
  dissimilarity is not a metric and cannot be supported by the BallTree.
  :pr:`25417` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| The performance of :meth:`neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.predict`
  and of :meth:`neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.predict_proba` has been improved
  when `n_neighbors` is large and `algorithm="brute"` with non Euclidean metrics.
  :pr:`24076` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`, :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neural_network`
.............................

- |Fix| :class:`neural_network.MLPRegressor` and :class:`neural_network.MLPClassifier`
  reports the right `n_iter_` when `warm_start=True`. It corresponds to the number
  of iterations performed on the current call to `fit` instead of the total number
  of iterations performed since the initialization of the estimator.
  :pr:`25443` by :user:`Marvin Krawutschke <Marvvxi>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |Feature| :class:`pipeline.FeatureUnion` can now use indexing notation (e.g.
  `feature_union["scalar"]`) to access transformers by name. :pr:`25093` by
  `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Feature| :class:`pipeline.FeatureUnion` can now access the
  `feature_names_in_` attribute if the `X` value seen during `.fit` has a
  `columns` attribute and all columns are strings. e.g. when `X` is a
  `pandas.DataFrame`
  :pr:`25220` by :user:`Ian Thompson <it176131>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |MajorFeature| Introduces :class:`preprocessing.TargetEncoder` which is a
  categorical encoding based on target mean conditioned on the value of the
  category. :pr:`25334` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Enhancement| Adds a `feature_name_combiner` parameter to
  :class:`preprocessing.OneHotEncoder`. This specifies a custom callable to create
  feature names to be returned by :meth:`get_feature_names_out`.
  The callable combines input arguments `(input_feature, category)` to a string.
  :pr:`22506` by :user:`Mario Kostelac <mariokostelac>`.

- |Enhancement| Added support for `sample_weight` in
  :class:`preprocessing.KBinsDiscretizer`. This allows specifying the parameter
  `sample_weight` for each sample to be used while fitting. The option is only
  available when `strategy` is set to `quantile` and `kmeans`.
  :pr:`24935` by :user:`Seladus <seladus>`, :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`, and
  :user:`Dea María Léon <deamarialeon>`, :pr:`25257` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`.

- |Fix| :class:`AdditiveChi2Sampler` is now stateless.
  The `sample_interval_` attribute is deprecated and will be removed in 1.5.
  :pr:`25190` by :user:`Vincent Maladière <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................

- |Enhancement| Adds a `class_names` parameter to
  :func:`tree.export_text`. This allows specifying the parameter `class_names`
  for each target class in ascending numerical order.
  :pr:`25387` by :user:`William M <Akbeeh>` and :user:`crispinlogan <crispinlogan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |API| :func:`estimator_checks.check_transformers_unfitted_stateless` has been
  introduced to ensure stateless transformers don't raise `NotFittedError`
  during `transform` with no prior call to `fit` or `fit_transform`.
  :pr:`25190` by :user:`Vincent Maladière <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

- |API| A `FutureWarning` is now raised when instantiating a class which inherits from
  a deprecated base class (i.e. decorated by :class:`utils.deprecated`) and which
  overrides the `__init__` method.
  :pr:`25733` by :user:`Brigitta Sipőcz <bsipocz>` and
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |FIX| Fixes :func:`utils.validation.check_array` to properly convert pandas
  extension arrays. :pr:`25813` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :func:`utils.validation.check_array` now suports pandas DataFrames with
  extension arrays and object dtypes by return an ndarray with object dtype.
  :pr:`25814` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.semi_supervised`
..............................

- |Enhancement| :meth:`LabelSpreading.fit` and :meth:`LabelPropagation.fit` now
  accepts sparse metrics.
  :pr:`19664` by :user:`Kaushik Amar Das <cozek>`.

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.2, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.

Commit message:

ENH Adds infrequent categories support to OrdinalEncoder (#25677)
Co-authored-by: Tim Head <betatim@gmail.com>
Co-authored-by: Olivier Grisel <olivier.grisel@ensta.org>
Co-authored-by: Andreas Mueller <t3kcit@gmail.com>

doc/whats_new/v1.3.rst, after:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_1_3:

Version 1.3.0
=============

**In Development**

.. include:: changelog_legend.inc

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- |Enhancement| :meth:`multiclass.OutputCodeClassifier.predict` now uses a more
  efficient pairwise distance reduction. As a consequence, the tie-breaking
  strategy is different and thus the predicted labels may be different.
  :pr:`25196` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| The `fit_transform` method of :class:`decomposition.DictionaryLearning`
  is more efficient but may produce different results as in previous versions when
  `transform_algorithm` is not the same as `fit_algorithm` and the number of iterations
  is small. :pr:`24871` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

- |Fix| Treat more consistently small values in the `W` and `H` matrices during the
  `fit` and `transform` steps of :class:`decomposition.NMF` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchNMF` which can produce different results than previous
  versions. :pr:`25438` by :user:`Yotam Avidar-Constantini <yotamcons>`.

- |Enhancement| The `sample_weight` parameter now will be used in centroids
  initialization for :class:`cluster.KMeans`, :class:`cluster.BisectingKMeans`
  and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`.
  This change will break backward compatibility, since numbers generated
  from same random seeds will be different.
  :pr:`25752` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`,
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

Changes impacting all modules
-----------------------------

- |Enhancement| The `get_feature_names_out` method of the following classes now
  raises a `NotFittedError` if the instance is not fitted. This ensures the error is
  consistent in all estimators with the `get_feature_names_out` method.

  - :class:`impute.MissingIndicator`
  - :class:`feature_extraction.DictVectorizer`
  - :class:`feature_extraction.text.TfidfTransformer`
  - :class:`feature_selection.GenericUnivariateSelect`
  - :class:`feature_selection.RFE`
  - :class:`feature_selection.RFECV`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFdr`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFpr`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFromModel`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectFwe`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectKBest`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SelectPercentile`
  - :class:`feature_selection.SequentialFeatureSelector`
  - :class:`feature_selection.VarianceThreshold`
  - :class:`kernel_approximation.AdditiveChi2Sampler`
  - :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`
  - :class:`impute.KNNImputer`
  - :class:`impute.SimpleImputer`
  - :class:`isotonic.IsotonicRegression`
  - :class:`preprocessing.Binarizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.KBinsDiscretizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.MaxAbsScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.MinMaxScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.Normalizer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.OrdinalEncoder`
  - :class:`preprocessing.PowerTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.QuantileTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.RobustScaler`
  - :class:`preprocessing.SplineTransformer`
  - :class:`preprocessing.StandardScaler`
  - :class:`random_projection.GaussianRandomProjection`
  - :class:`random_projection.SparseRandomProjection`

  The `NotFittedError` displays an informative message asking to fit the instance
  with the appropriate arguments.

  :pr:`25294`, :pr:`25308`, :pr:`25291`, :pr:`25367`, :pr:`25402`,
  by :user:`John Pangas <jpangas>`, :user:`Rahil Parikh <rprkh>` ,
  and :user:`Alex Buzenet <albuzenet>`.

- |Enhancement| Added a multi-threaded Cython routine to the compute squared
  Euclidean distances (sometimes followed by a fused reduction operation) for a
  pair of datasets consisting of a sparse CSR matrix and a dense NumPy.

  This can improve the performance of following functions and estimators:

  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin`
  - :func:`sklearn.metrics.pairwise_distances_argmin_min`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.AffinityPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.Birch`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.MeanShift`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.OPTICS`
  - :class:`sklearn.cluster.SpectralClustering`
  - :func:`sklearn.feature_selection.mutual_info_regression`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.KNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsClassifier`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.RadiusNeighborsRegressor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.LocalOutlierFactor`
  - :class:`sklearn.neighbors.NearestNeighbors`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.Isomap`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.LocallyLinearEmbedding`
  - :class:`sklearn.manifold.TSNE`
  - :func:`sklearn.manifold.trustworthiness`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelPropagation`
  - :class:`sklearn.semi_supervised.LabelSpreading`

  A typical example of this performance improvement happens when passing a sparse
  CSR matrix to the `predict` or `transform` method of estimators that rely on
  a dense NumPy representation to store their fitted parameters (or the reverse).

  For instance, :meth:`sklearn.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors` is now up to 2 times faster
  for this case on commonly available laptops.

  :pr:`25044` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

Changelog
---------

..
    Entries should be grouped by module (in alphabetic order) and prefixed with
    one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|, |Enhancement|,
    |Fix| or |API| (see whats_new.rst for descriptions).
    Entries should be ordered by those labels (e.g. |Fix| after |Efficiency|).
    Changes not specific to a module should be listed under *Multiple Modules*
    or *Miscellaneous*.
    Entries should end with:
    :pr:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.
    where 123456 is the *pull request* number, not the issue number.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_selection`
................................

- |Enhancement| All selectors in :mod:`sklearn.feature_selection` will preserve
  a DataFrame's dtype when transformed. :pr:`25102` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :class:`feature_selection.SequentialFeatureSelector`'s `cv` parameter
  now supports generators. :pr:`25973` by `Yao Xiao <Charlie-XIAO>`.

:mod:`sklearn.base`
...................

- |Feature| A `__sklearn_clone__` protocol is now available to override the
  default behavior of :func:`base.clone`. :pr:`24568` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.calibration`
..........................

- |Fix| :class:`calibration.CalibratedClassifierCV` now does not enforce sample
  alignment on `fit_params`. :pr:`25805` by `Adrin Jalali`_.

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |API| The `sample_weight` parameter in `predict` for
  :meth:`cluster.KMeans.predict` and :meth:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans.predict`
  is now deprecated and will be removed in v1.5.
  :pr:`25251` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`.

- |Enhancement| The `sample_weight` parameter now will be used in centroids
  initialization for :class:`cluster.KMeans`, :class:`cluster.BisectingKMeans`
  and :class:`cluster.MiniBatchKMeans`.
  This change will break backward compatibility, since numbers generated
  from same random seeds will be different.
  :pr:`25752` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`,
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.datasets`
.......................

- |API| The `data_transposed` argument of :func:`datasets.make_sparse_coded_signal`
  is deprecated and will be removed in v1.5.
  :pr:`25784` by :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger`.

:mod:`sklearn.decomposition`
............................

- |Enhancement| :class:`decomposition.DictionaryLearning` now accepts the parameter
  `callback` for consistency with the function :func:`decomposition.dict_learning`.
  :pr:`24871` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

- |Efficiency| :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchDictionaryLearning` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchSparsePCA` are now faster for small batch sizes by
  avoiding duplicate validations.
  :pr:`25490` by :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |Fix| Treat more consistently small values in the `W` and `H` matrices during the
  `fit` and `transform` steps of :class:`decomposition.NMF` and
  :class:`decomposition.MiniBatchNMF` which can produce different results than previous
  versions. :pr:`25438` by :user:`Yotam Avidar-Constantini <yotamcons>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Feature| :class:`ensemble.HistGradientBoostingRegressor` now supports
  the Gamma deviance loss via `loss="gamma"`.
  Using the Gamma deviance as loss function comes in handy for modelling skewed
  distributed, strictly positive valued targets.
  :pr:`22409` by :user:`Christian Lorentzen <lorentzenchr>`.

- |Feature| Compute a custom out-of-bag score by passing a callable to
  :class:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier`, :class:`ensemble.RandomForestRegressor`,
  :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesClassifier` and :class:`ensemble.ExtraTreesRegressor`.
  :pr:`25177` by :user:`Tim Head <betatim>`.

- |Feature| :class:`ensemble.GradientBoostingClassifier` now exposes
  out-of-bag scores via the `oob_scores_` or `oob_score_` attributes.
  :pr:`24882` by :user:`Ashwin Mathur <awinml>`.

- |Efficiency| :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest` predict time is now faster
  (typically by a factor of 8 or more). Internally, the estimator now precomputes
  decision path lengths per tree at `fit` time. It is therefore not possible
  to load an estimator trained with scikit-learn 1.2 to make it predict with
  scikit-learn 1.3: retraining with scikit-learn 1.3 is required.
  :pr:`25186` by :user:`Felipe Breve Siola <fsiola>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`ensemble.BaggingClassifier` and
  :class:`ensemble.BaggingRegressor` expose the `allow_nan` tag from the
  underlying estimator. :pr:`25506` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :meth:`ensemble.RandomForestClassifier.fit` sets `max_samples = 1`
  when `max_samples` is a float and `round(n_samples * max_samples) < 1`.
  :pr:`25601` by :user:`Jan Fidor <JanFidor>`.

- |Fix| :meth:`ensemble.IsolationForest.fit` no longer warns about missing
  feature names when called with `contamination` not `"auto"` on a pandas
  dataframe.
  :pr:`25931` by :user:`Yao Xiao <Charlie-XIAO>`.

:mod:`sklearn.exception`
........................
- |Feature| Added :class:`exception.InconsistentVersionWarning` which is raised
  when a scikit-learn estimator is unpickled with a scikit-learn version that is
  inconsistent with the sckit-learn verion the estimator was pickled with.
  :pr:`25297` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.feature_extraction`
.................................

- |API| :class:`feature_extraction.image.PatchExtractor` now follows the
  transformer API of scikit-learn. This class is defined as a stateless transformer
  meaning that it is note required to call `fit` before calling `transform`.
  Parameter validation only happens at `fit` time.
  :pr:`24230` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.impute`
.....................

- |Enhancement| Added the parameter `fill_value` to :class:`impute.IterativeImputer`.
  :pr:`25232` by :user:`Thijs van Weezel <ValueInvestorThijs>`.

:mod:`sklearn.inspection`
.........................

- |API| :func:`inspection.partial_dependence` returns a :class:`utils.Bunch` with
  new key: `grid_values`. The `values` key is deprecated in favor of `grid_values`
  and the `values` key will be removed in 1.5.
  :pr:`21809` and :pr:`25732` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Enhancement| :class:`SGDClassifier`, :class:`SGDRegressor` and
  :class:`SGDOneClassSVM` now preserve dtype for `numpy.float32`.
  :pr:`25587` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Efficiency| The computation of the expected mutual information in
  :func:`metrics.adjusted_mutual_info_score` is now faster when the number of
  unique labels is large and its memory usage is reduced in general.
  :pr:`25713` by :user:`Kshitij Mathur <Kshitij68>`,
  :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`, :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>` and
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |Feature| Adds `zero_division=np.nan` to multiple classification metrics:
  :func:`precision_score`, :func:`recall_score`, :func:`f1_score`,
  :func:`fbeta_score`, :func:`precision_recall_fscore_support`,
  :func:`classification_report`. When `zero_division=np.nan` and there is a
  zero division, the metric is undefined and is excluded from averaging. When not used
  for averages, the value returned is `np.nan`.
  :pr:`25531` by :user:`Marc Torrellas Socastro <marctorsoc>`.

- |Fix| :func:`metric.manhattan_distances` now supports readonly sparse datasets.
  :pr:`25432` by :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

- |Fix| Fixed :func:`classification_report` so that empty input will return
  `np.nan`. Previously, "macro avg" and `weighted avg` would return
  e.g. `f1-score=np.nan` and `f1-score=0.0`, being inconsistent. Now, they
  both return `np.nan`.
  :pr:`25531` by :user:`Marc Torrellas Socastro <marctorsoc>`.

- |Fix| :func:`metric.ndcg_score` now gives a meaningful error message for input of
  length 1.
  :pr:`25672` by :user:`Lene Preuss <lene>` and :user:`Wei-Chun Chu <wcchu>`.

- |Enhancement| :class:`metrics.silhouette_samples` nows accepts a sparse
  matrix of pairwise distances between samples, or a feature array.
  :pr:`18723` by :user:`Sahil Gupta <sahilgupta2105>` and
  :pr:`24677` by :user:`Ashwin Mathur <awinml>`.

- |Enhancement| A new parameter `drop_intermediate` was added to
  :func:`metrics.precision_recall_curve`,
  :func:`metrics.PrecisionRecallDisplay.from_estimator`,
  :func:`metrics.PrecisionRecallDisplay.from_predictions`,
  which drops some suboptimal thresholds to create lighter precision-recall
  curves.
  :pr:`24668` by :user:`dberenbaum`.

- |Fix| :func:`log_loss` raises a warning if the values of the parameter `y_pred` are
  not normalized, instead of actually normalizing them in the metric. Starting from
  1.5 this will raise an error. :pr:`25299` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor`.

- |API| The `eps` parameter of the :func:`log_loss` has been deprecated and will be
  removed in 1.5. :pr:`25299` by :user:`Omar Salman <OmarManzoor>`.

:mod:`sklearn.model_selection`
..............................

- |Enhancement| :func:`model_selection.cross_validate` accepts a new parameter
  `return_indices` to return the train-test indices of each cv split.
  :pr:`25659` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

:mod:`sklearn.naive_bayes`
..........................

- |Fix| :class:`naive_bayes.GaussianNB` does not raise anymore a `ZeroDivisionError`
  when the provided `sample_weight` reduces the problem to a single class in `fit`.
  :pr:`24140` by :user:`Jonathan Ohayon <Johayon>` and :user:`Chiara Marmo <cmarmo>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |Fix| Remove support for `KulsinskiDistance` in :class:`neighbors.BallTree`. This
  dissimilarity is not a metric and cannot be supported by the BallTree.
  :pr:`25417` by :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`.

- |Enhancement| The performance of :meth:`neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.predict`
  and of :meth:`neighbors.KNeighborsClassifier.predict_proba` has been improved
  when `n_neighbors` is large and `algorithm="brute"` with non Euclidean metrics.
  :pr:`24076` by :user:`Meekail Zain <micky774>`, :user:`Julien Jerphanion <jjerphan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.neural_network`
.............................

- |Fix| :class:`neural_network.MLPRegressor` and :class:`neural_network.MLPClassifier`
  reports the right `n_iter_` when `warm_start=True`. It corresponds to the number
  of iterations performed on the current call to `fit` instead of the total number
  of iterations performed since the initialization of the estimator.
  :pr:`25443` by :user:`Marvin Krawutschke <Marvvxi>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |Feature| :class:`pipeline.FeatureUnion` can now use indexing notation (e.g.
  `feature_union["scalar"]`) to access transformers by name. :pr:`25093` by
  `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Feature| :class:`pipeline.FeatureUnion` can now access the
  `feature_names_in_` attribute if the `X` value seen during `.fit` has a
  `columns` attribute and all columns are strings. e.g. when `X` is a
  `pandas.DataFrame`
  :pr:`25220` by :user:`Ian Thompson <it176131>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |MajorFeature| Introduces :class:`preprocessing.TargetEncoder` which is a
  categorical encoding based on target mean conditioned on the value of the
  category. :pr:`25334` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Enhancement| Adds a `feature_name_combiner` parameter to
  :class:`preprocessing.OneHotEncoder`. This specifies a custom callable to create
  feature names to be returned by :meth:`get_feature_names_out`.
  The callable combines input arguments `(input_feature, category)` to a string.
  :pr:`22506` by :user:`Mario Kostelac <mariokostelac>`.

- |Enhancement| Added support for `sample_weight` in
  :class:`preprocessing.KBinsDiscretizer`. This allows specifying the parameter
  `sample_weight` for each sample to be used while fitting. The option is only
  available when `strategy` is set to `quantile` and `kmeans`.
  :pr:`24935` by :user:`Seladus <seladus>`, :user:`Guillaume Lemaitre <glemaitre>`, and
  :user:`Dea María Léon <deamarialeon>`, :pr:`25257` by :user:`Gleb Levitski <glevv>`.

- |Feature| :class:`preprocessing.OrdinalEncoder` now supports grouping
  infrequent categories into a single feature. Grouping infrequent categories
  is enabled by specifying how to select infrequent categories with
  `min_frequency` or `max_categories`. :pr:`25677` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :class:`AdditiveChi2Sampler` is now stateless.
  The `sample_interval_` attribute is deprecated and will be removed in 1.5.
  :pr:`25190` by :user:`Vincent Maladière <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................

- |Enhancement| Adds a `class_names` parameter to
  :func:`tree.export_text`. This allows specifying the parameter `class_names`
  for each target class in ascending numerical order.
  :pr:`25387` by :user:`William M <Akbeeh>` and :user:`crispinlogan <crispinlogan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.utils`
....................

- |API| :func:`estimator_checks.check_transformers_unfitted_stateless` has been
  introduced to ensure stateless transformers don't raise `NotFittedError`
  during `transform` with no prior call to `fit` or `fit_transform`.
  :pr:`25190` by :user:`Vincent Maladière <Vincent-Maladiere>`.

- |API| A `FutureWarning` is now raised when instantiating a class which inherits from
  a deprecated base class (i.e. decorated by :class:`utils.deprecated`) and which
  overrides the `__init__` method.
  :pr:`25733` by :user:`Brigitta Sipőcz <bsipocz>` and
  :user:`Jérémie du Boisberranger <jeremiedbb>`.

- |FIX| Fixes :func:`utils.validation.check_array` to properly convert pandas
  extension arrays. :pr:`25813` by `Thomas Fan`_.

- |Fix| :func:`utils.validation.check_array` now suports pandas DataFrames with
  extension arrays and object dtypes by return an ndarray with object dtype.
  :pr:`25814` by `Thomas Fan`_.

:mod:`sklearn.semi_supervised`
..............................

- |Enhancement| :meth:`LabelSpreading.fit` and :meth:`LabelPropagation.fit` now
  accepts sparse metrics.
  :pr:`19664` by :user:`Kaushik Amar Das <cozek>`.

Code and Documentation Contributors
-----------------------------------

Thanks to everyone who has contributed to the maintenance and improvement of
the project since version 1.2, including:

TODO: update at the time of the release.
